---
layout: post
title:  "Property rights and incentives"
date:   2019-10-05 12:00:00 +0700
categories: economics
---

In his works David Friedman argues for private enforcement of property rights (see [1] — [3]). Is it plausible that individuals in a society can outsource security to competing agencies? We will analyze this in a somewhat formal way. Friedman makes the implicit assumption that in the current structures there is a single agency taking this task — the government, i.e. a unified actor providing security. Assume that we have some process where the society as a whole decides how property is enforced, and they choose a certain way of enforcement. The security agency still need to be paid for their expenses. The problem of course is that no individual has an incentive to pay for security alone without knowing others will pay for it. To enforce security for an individual, the security of the society as a whole is necessary. The security of a building can not be provided independently of the security of a single room. This only refers to the net-benefits of the good security and how they attributable does not imply anything about how the good is created.

What is required in essence is some kind of mechanism or tool which will allow individuals contribute when they can be assured others will contribute. If we assume a human third party to take the place of an arbitrator of sorts the individuals need to trust that party for its actions. The delegation of the task can be seen as mere transfer of economic values from A to B under certain conditions C. The third party has no other role than transferring value under certain conditions. The problem of creating public goods is largely related to the enforcement of an assurance contract.

The surprising solution to this problem is that we can create a system in software which will take the role of a human third party. It is a software which is automated and transfers values based on its rules. It has attached a digital unit in which individual contributions will be paid. The rules are enforced, because not following them will cost the contributors money. So the punishment consists of monetary losses rather than physical actions.

Can we extend this solution to a choice of enforcement rules by a market? People in this marketplace can buy and sell these digital units to align with certain rules of property rights. This works as long as the rights refer to purely digital assets and have therefore no requirement of being singular. Physical property and traditional legal rights require a singular property rights resolution mechanism, i.e. consensus on how rights can be transferred. Whatever the resolution is the agency taking the role of the transfer can be paid in the monetary unit.

This system is different from existing democracies in important ways. There are also some similarities however. Since a democracy has candidates and parties which “compete” for ideas or positions, there is a decision making process which resembles the one described above. A democracy in that sense is ideally a marketplace of ideas where people decide what are the best rules. However these systems tend to be rather ineffective as changes are slow and delegates are generally not reactive to the decision of the group, but form their own class of people in power. The cost of democratic bureaucracies is related to cost of third parties in general.

If we assume that the cost of security is publicly known and the same for all — how much should a security agency be paid? Ideally the costs it incurs plus a risk adjusted return. Separate from the cost of securing an entire system is securing a particular arrangement i.e. contract which exists in this framework. Valid, tangible contracts would need to be checked if they invalidate or violate other contracts.

It can be beneficial to talk about the mentioned systems in more abstract terms than blockchains and Cryptocurrencies to show that they are a concrete implementation of a more abstract concept. In Bitcoin the rewards for mining are mostly the block reward which is paid by for everyone. The actual user-paid fees is still only a fraction of the cost compared to the block reward. On a system level Proof-of-Work currencies have as the cost the electricity, so that the fees are higher than what they could be in theory. However although Proof-of-Stake and Delegated Proof-of-Stake have not won in the market, their economic and security model has to be assumed to be inferior by the market, at least for now. While PoS and DPOS have lower effective costs still the true cost is not known or benefits not passed through to the user in a direct manner. The stakeholders/delegates make money by forging above their risk-adjusted return. One of the fundamental problems of economics is measuring value or the protocol of revealing it or hiding it when in the interest of the agent. Network protocol with currency are no different in this regard. What is different is that there can be a system design in code which sets up the framework for actions of the participants. Before Bitcoin protocols typically had either some ambiguity or they were designed more for communications rather than value.

To analyze in how far security can be privatized and subject to market protocols, it will be helpful to understand the relationship between general security and security of specific rights and contracts. E.g. the probability of a coup or regime change tomorrow and the protection of land rights or specific contract rights are related. Currently we have really no way of measuring or even understanding the specific economic costs of such security services, other than a vague military budget or costs to go court and hire lawyers. The cost of hiring a guard for a private property and the cost of hiring a military for a common property are different, because the former is a directly observable and measurable one, and the latter is largely unobserved, except the payment of a tax.

Incentives in Cryptocurrency are transactions which happen in the core protocol. In Bitcoin this is mostly the block subsidy (originally 50 Bitcoins every 10 minutes). In an ideal scenario every Peer checks all transactions (N to N). If the number of validating peers is small then the non validating peers are effectively outsourcing their security to the validating peers. To some extent these participants can be said to trust some kind of core system or network. Also most likely not all participants are able to validate the entire source codebase and are outsourcing the understanding of code to others. We are currently only beginning to understand what a world can look like where humans trust computers for essential tasks which involve monetary value and securing property rights. As with other highly advanced technology there will be metaphors, procedures, etc. which make the process more tangible to humans (see [6]). An example of this is the metaphor of a key or a coin, which really is a loose metaphor for an underlying complex system.

* [1] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Machinery_of_Freedom
* [2] http://www.daviddfriedman.com/Future_Imperfect/Chapter7.html
* [3] http://www.daviddfriedman.com/#mybooks
* [4] https://medium.com/@bytemaster/thoughts-on-perpetual-property-rights-b8c7f5bf4221
* [5] https://nakamotoinstitute.org/measuring-value/
* [6] https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YpSeOU1VVj4