---
layout: post
title:  "Proof of Asset"
date:   2019-05-25 12:24:28 +0700
categories: blockchain
---
This is a sketch of a new decision algorithm I call Proof-of-Asset. It is meant to address issues with Proof-of-Work and Proof-of-Stake.
The origin of this idea is considering Proof-of-Stake and its issues and the role of work in Bitcoin. The whitepaper states:

> The proof-of-work also solves the problem of determining representation in majority decision making. If the majority were based on one-IP-address-one-vote, it could be subverted by anyone able to allocate many IPs. Proof-of-work is essentially one-CPU-one-vote. 

Since Bitcoin already has distributed coins, it is natural to consider to use the ability to prove ownership of coins to generate blocks itself. However, an immediate obvious concern is that the number of individual owners of coins is generally unknown and there is no mechanism to ensure wide distribution in the first place, in particular in pure Proof-of-Stake schemes. The other unsolved issue is that in this case production of blocks has no cost to the stakers.

Since the invention of Proof-of-Stake arguably the most important breakthrough in the new field of Cryptoeconomics are generalised Smart contracts with Ethereum. Smart contracts can issue tokens like Bitcoin's ColoredCoins, but the balances can be tracked in the contract.

To put these two ideas together we can now consider the ability for the network to generate special types of tokens. These tokens are independently generated and distributed from coins. They are associated with a public-private keypair like any other token (i.e. ERC20 token). The tokens are not divisible and the supply curve can have follow any desired function. They can be created at creation or distributed over time. Similar to Delegated-Proof-of-Stake the number of delegates now is known, but it is not fixed through time. The special tokens can be called Verification assets. Smart contracts which are part of consensus are separate from other smart contracts, because they are global singletons and there is agreement they are canonical.

Proof-of-Asset can have several variants: Proof-of-Asset-Work, Proof-of-Asset-Stake, Proof-of-Asset-Delegate, Proof-of-Asset-Auction and more. Because the acquisition of the verification token can be a separate process it can be part of the consensus. The analogy is that of seats in parliament. Delegated Proof-of-Stake does have a notion of votes for delegates, but it tends to be quite 
centralised because delegates acquire more and more power as transaction fees get spent to them offsetting their costs by a considerable profit margin. We want to avoid a centralised oligarchy i.e. a system where the rich aggregate economic and political power. This includes any entities related to software development, sales etc.

A novel property of this scheme is the ability to encode a limited lifetime. Verfication nodes in PoW and PoS are essentially unlimited in their power. Once a person or entity has acquired the ability to generate blocks, there is no way to mitigate that influence. While in PoW competition exists, it is not very distributed. In PoS the influence of large stakeholders is very likely to grow over time, since users pay fees to large stakeholders. This feature of limited lifetime (duration) is achieved by encoding the time it expires in the smart contract at its creation.

In Proof-of-Asset-Work (PoAW) nodes expend CPU power. Once they do so at a certain block height, the network transfers the verification asset (similar to distribution of coins with the coinbase transaction in Bitcoin). After this, the nodes can simply use the asset itself to prove their right to generate blocks without expending any CPU power.

In Proof-of-Asset-Stake (PoAS) nodes prove their ownership of coins. Once they do, they acquire the verification asset. The different to classical PoS is that the number of nodes is a variable. In PoS systems if there is a practical threshold of e.g. 1% of stake to be meaningful the number of staking-nodes is <100.

In Proof-of-Asset-Auction (PoAA) nodes which win the auction receive the verification tokens. The payment for the auction goes into a treasury address which makes available the resources for development. In this case the pay-off structure is fundamentally different from PoW and PoS. Nodes pay upfront for the ability to verify and receive rewards later. The ability to generate blocks is guaranteed for the duration.

It also possible to add slashing conditions. The asset can be expired if the expired function is called by other nodes.


